---
title: Writing architecture series 01
date: 2025-12-28T14:21:26+08:00
author: Chen (Chenkun Ma)
avatar: /img/personal/avatar.jpg
cover: Writing architecture series 02.jpg



categories:
  - Writing architecture Series

weight: 40
---


## How might the Yellowstone ecosystem be shaped by, and in turn has shaped, the cultural and political history of Wyoming.


<!--more-->
Equalibrium of yellowstone ecological system


Yellowstone’s natural regulation system relies on a complex biological consumer and producer relationship. Some of Yellowstone area’s most prolific producers are wheatgrass, pond lilies, lodgepole pines, quaking aspen, green algae, and willows. These autotrophs provide food for more complex organisms on higher trophic levels. There are consumers in the ecosystem, including beavers, elk, trout, mayflies, and deer mice. Their role in the food chain is to control the producer population and become the energy source for secondary and tertiary consumers. Secondary consumers include osprey, bald eagles, grizzly bears, coyotes, and bison. They derive their energy from primary consumers and producers and are also sources of energy for tertiary consumers. The most publicized tertiary consumers are the wolves.

Situated in the same ecologically open physical system, humans are linked to the food web in a non-producer and consumer relationship. Thus, Yellowstone’s economy is structured around ecological tourism. However, the ecosystem is abstracted into apparatuses of different meanings in the milieu of various sectors of human divisions through the overlap of thresholds of the Greater Yellowstone ecology and boundary of the national park. The character of tourism is multidimensional in that it is composed of many interdependent elements. The industry functions adequately, and cooperation and coordination between various facilitators are required. Each component has the potential to exhibit widely differing economic performances. Any weak link in the system can adversely affect other elements, which, under different circumstances, would be economically healthy. The tourism industry operates in tertiary occupations, catering, and travel agencies.

Yet the tie that binds Yellowstone to tourists operates on a different spectrum than the ranchers and the federal government. How does a remote piece of land that lacks basic accommodation and infrastructure become so attractive to visitors outside the boundary? This strange massive ,seasonal human migration can be explained from the tourist gaze and the aesthetics of ecology. The tourist gaze refers to a way of perceiving or relating to places that cut them off from the ‘real world’ and emphasize the exotic aspects of the tourist experience. A tourist gaze upon the visited place amounts to departing from one’s own established routines and contrasting the new environment with the ordinary and familiar one. Enhanced by the physical distance of the visitor from her own home, the tourist gaze is consistently “constructed through difference,” that is, through the distance separating everyday, familiar, and routinary situations and objects from what is seen as unfamiliar and extraordinary in the visited place.

The role of tourists as detached aesthetic beholders is further attested by their usual need to crystallize the experience using pictures and videos: “People linger over [the tourist gaze], which is then normally visually objectified or captured through photographs, postcards, films, models and so on. These enable the gaze to be endlessly reproduced and recaptured.”2 Tourists aim to draw aesthetic pleasure from observing how daily life and its routines are enrolled in the selected tourist destination. They do so via the adoption of the ‘tourist gaze,’ which leads the subject to a process of aesthetic detachment, estrangement, or defamiliarization from what she observes. On the other hand, tourists also expect that what they see is true and genuine. They want to experience the everyday life of the place they are visiting as it really is—unspoiled, unaltered, untouristed. For this purpose, they direct their attention towards visible signs that can attest to its authenticity—plaques, signals, markings, and other devices that serve as symbols or representations of the site’s integrity.

Depending upon the seasonal rhythm of each tourist area, casual work and seasonal unemployment are frequently the distinguishing features of an economic system based on tourism. The Yellowstone tourism economy represents an insecure growth industry affected by recessions. Wolves were treated as the natural factor that caused economic downplay of the local ranchers, whose lives are supported by ranching cows and sheep. Since tourism is a travel industry, transportation represents one of the more critical elements in this system both inside and outside the park. Tourist visitation is enhanced by fast dependable and economical methods. The scale and character of tourism at Yellowstone are dependent on a number of variables, which are primarily technological in nature

Before the Yellowstone tourism industry was well developed, the federal government needed to define the legislation more clearly. It was the atmosphere of neglect and vulnerability within the park that awaited the Northern Pacific’s transcontinental line when it reached Montana Territory in 1882. Unquestionably, the Northern Pacific railroad company took advantage of the uncertainties in early Yellowstone. However, its involvement began much earlier. Nathaniel Langford, who became the first park superintendent, had been a member of General Henry D. Washburn’s exploration team into Yellowstone in 1870 and had met with Northern Pacific financier Jay Cooke before the trip began. Cooke and Langford plotted how to draw attention to the future railroad route through Montana Territory, and Langford was hired to provide publicity for the expedition. As part of this assignment, Langford wrote two articles for Scribner’s Monthly and delivered 20 lectures on the beauty of the Yellowstone region. Cooke also realized the benefit of having pictures to promote Yellowstone and so helped pay for artist Thomas Moran to accompany geologist Ferdinand Hayden on his survey expedition in 1871. Moran produced 16 watercolor paintings, which convinced Congress to protect Yellowstone in conjunction with Hayden’s official report of his exploration and the images of expedition photographer William Henry Jackson.


In the set of paintings Moran has drawn, none of them had a single sight of animals. The aesthetics of emptiness could be viewed as a testament to Moran’s intention to forge an image of the unspoiled landscape and deny animals as its prior residents at the site. In the painting, The Grand Canyon of Yellowstone, the three-quarter position of the canvas shows the canyon where a cascade flows into the valley, and a piece of cloud and mist hovers on top of the canyon, compositionally forming a circle that symbolizes a cycle. It illustrates the power of transformation that turns liquid to gas and conveys some sort of magic that denies gravity. This is also reflected in the painting, where he intentionally pointed the tourist’s gaze to the geyser. The early tourist gaze was coined through media and operated like photographs, crystalizing the gaze and reproducing itself.

Before Yellowstone could become a resort location luring tourists for the Northern Pacific, it needed hotels, restaurants and adequate access to the major attractions. With no government funding for these improvements on the horizon, officials of the Northern Pacific saw an opportunity to seize exclusive development rights.

The Northern Pacific quietly established a unit to develop the needed tourist services called the Yellowstone Park Improvement Company. In September of 1882, Acting Secretary of the Interior Merritt L. Joslyn granted this company exclusive rights to hotels, stages, and telegraph service within the park. Under the lease agreement, the Improvement Company would pay only two dollars per acre for 640-acre sections surrounding all of the park’s most desirable sites. The lessees also were to have the right to cut timber for construction and fuel and to farm some areas of the park. The grant to the Northern Pacific, 47 million acres, gave the Northern Pacific effective control for up to 100 miles on either side of the right-of-way and thus considerable political weight. Through its subsidiary companies, the corporation controlled significant mineral and timber resources throughout the entire Northwest. 2 Since the beginning of its conception, the railroad has not only been a technology that mobilized people to cast their tourist gaze but also symbolically represented a certain social status and purchasing power reflected through other catering industries that came along with it.

The Improvement Company’s rapid and heavy-handed progress in Yellowstone quickly came under attack, and local support for the Northern Pacific began to slip. After company officials were accused of killing game within the park to feed their workers, for example, the Bozeman Avant Courier (1883c) published the following editorial against the “Despoliation Company.

Phillips, an attorney who came from a well-known family in Washington, D.C., was appointed by the Secretary of the Interior to investigate the management of Yellowstone. Phillips spent the summer of 1885 in the park and returned with a thorough report detailing problems and threats. Most important, he summarized what he thought were the key caretaking responsibilities: protecting wildlife, “preserving the park as much as possible in a state of nature,” and maintaining “the natural forests in a region where so many great rivers of the continent find their source.”
One strategy for railroad lobbyists, this time in 1894, was to win approval for a more “environmentally friendly” railroad. Electric engines, cleaner and quieter, would have eliminated the fire hazard, although they would have required the construction of power generators on two waterfalls along the Yellowstone River. The bill for an electric railroad faltered, as did others before it, to Senator Vest’s countercall for improved protection, funding, and management for the park. The electric railroad received some endorsements by those who had previously fought against the spur.1 The symbiotic tehnology in a sense, can bypass the legislative limitations through the apparatus of environmentalist strategies to acquire exclusive benfits.

While the federal government benefits from taxes on the tourism industry, the preservation of the ecosystem creates conflicts for ranchers who reside outside of the tourist economy. According to Matthew, the reintroduction of wolves belongs to the environmental movement’s overriding commitment to increased social control of land use through environmental regulation. The environmentalist movement has increasingly become committed to the idea that more legislation is indispensable to the achievement of a long-term ecological agenda. Environmentalists have increasingly placed their bets on national legislation, which diminishes the rights of local property owners as Beisher argued that the environmental boundary of wolves overlaps with the larger area of the Yellowstone ecosystem and the states of Wyoming. Montana and interfere with the livestock in nearby ranches. It creates a possibility that landowners will be forced to concede control of land to the federal authorities.

According to Siegert, The logic of door is intimately connected to the notion of the threshold,a zone that belongs neither to the inside nor the outside and is thus an extremely dangerous place.1 Historically, the concept of doors and thresholds contains as much symbolic content as its physical boundary. We tend to dramatize the term. Siegert remarks that the logic of the door is intimately connected to the notion of the threshold, a zone that belongs neither to the inside nor the outside and is thus an extremely dangerous place. The Romans saw the house door as dividing two worlds, “the world outside, where there are innumerable hostile influences and powers, and the region within the limits of the house, the influences and powers of which are friendly.”Arnold van Gennep interprets crossing through doors and gates as a rite of passage: “To cross the threshold is to unite oneself with a new world. It is thus an important act in marriage, adoption, ordination, and funeral ceremony”. According to Siegert, To step through a door, in turn, is to submit to the law of that symbolic order, a law—be it the law of the polis or the paternal oikos— that is established by means of the distinction between inside and outside. 2 To animals in the ecosystem, this layer of political economic dramatization was never realized as intended. So, the act of crossing to the federal government or the ranchers seems to unconsciously establish an agreement through the “mutual“ language of fencing. However, the reality is that the herds and wolves cannot abstract the concept of boundary; unintentional damage to the fences is often present. And we defined it as trespassing since animals now offended the legal border that we as humans abide by. The boundary of Yellowstone National Park was initially arbitrarily determined based on the categorical system of the tourist gaze, which operates based on differences. So, the misalignment of two milieu created the overlap of boundaries.

Although the federal government defines the border of Yellowstone National Park as the border containing Yellowstone’s valuable natural resources and the border for the ranching industry, “ the door” (wilderness boundary) of the park symbolizes the act of crossing predators as not only a financial downplay but also interference of property rights. It raises the question of the Politics of undecidability regarding animals. In case animals unintentionally traverse the rights to develop, housing, and ranching, should they or the ranchers be held accountable for the economic loss? The undecidability caused by both parties due to the hybridity of the milieu is one of the reasons for the undecidability of national park preservation strategies.

Not only did wolves become interlocked to human benefits through land rights, but the reintroduction of wolves increased the percentage of fruit in the grizzly bear diet, and thus, the presence or absence of an apex predator can change the dietary pattern of other animals to either maintain or break the state of ecological balance. For the grizzly bear, the decline in berry consumption might result from shifting dietary habits to trout and elk. Other animals, such as beavers, share a similar process of shifting dietary habits due to the disappearance of wolves. When Edward Warren conducted his survey in the 1920s, he saw that the rodents’ preferred forage was aspen. Today, “virtually all the beavers in northern Yellowstone are eating willow,” said Smith. “So, the story is about an abundant population, using willow, a population crash, a long period with very few beavers, and then a recovery based on an interaction with elk and predators, but the recovery is entirely dependent upon willow,” he explained.1 While the bark of aspen has been one of the primary food sources for elk, studies have shown that elk consume a mixture of herbs in different seasons, and their consumption of aspen is due to the lack of grasses, sedges, and forbs. Elk’s migration is mostly driven by the nutritious grass, but 97 percent of the elk in North America needed a winter range to survive. They are fed through mechanized equipment, 35 tons of alfalfa pellets per day once feeding begins. The hays are dried and compressed into pellets with machines. The pellets are then cooled, dried, and packaged for use as livestock feed. This process ensures that the alfalfa pellets are of high quality and provide a convenient and nutritious feed option for livestock.

A connection can thus be established between the concept of ecological preservation and the idea of oikonomia, which refers to a dogma of administration that is normalized and introduced to an existing set of social beliefs. If the concept of the national park (to preserve the image of an unspoiled ecological intact system and benefit from its tourist value)is the apparatus that constrains the interest of ranchers, These pellets, which now seamlessly serve double sided both as Yellowstone’s absent primary producer- wheatgrass, and a piece of the keystone that supports the whole structure of government environmentalist strategies. Therefore, the pellets coincidentally establish a strange analogy between two non-communicating milieus, between ecology and human rights.

In 1872, Yellowstone became the United State’s first national park. Initially, visitation to the park was minimal- only about 1,000 visitors annually- due to its remote location, difficult access, and primitive accommodations. Very early on, this access was dramatically improved as railroads viewed rail service to Yellowstone as an opportunity for development. In 1882, the Northern Pacific Railroad reached Livingston, Montana, and soon added a spur to Cinnabar, close to the north entrance of the park. By 1902, Northern Pacific trains reached Gardiner, adjacent to the north entrance to the park. Tourists boarded stagecoaches in Gardiner to continue their trip through the park. In 1898, the Burlington reached Cody, Wyoming. Stage service through the park was available from that location as well.1 The Yellowstone National Park’s cultural system is an ideological component that is essentially romantic in its perspective. This view essentially holds that the park is unspoiled by the artifice of human hands. It serves historically as the factor upon which the park was established and represents a perspective that continues to be the foundation upon which the park is visited today. Yellowstone’s landscape incorporates an extensive and complex network of artifice, which can be called Yellowstone’s cultural system. Those elements of the natural resource that are perceived or promoted as “primary” receive the most significant construction and development funding. Those identified as “lesser” natural features receive progressively less attention and funding depending upon their relative position on the scale. Since the initial conception of the national park, natural resources have been evaluated by some value systems and categorized into different groups based on the extent of differences from the repetitive lives of an urbanite.

To weave a whole picture of the bio-economy of the ecosystem as an apparatus, the re-introduction of wolves is only a branch of the tree of hybridity between Yellowstone economics and the ecosystem. If we assume that the federal government used the concept of the national park as the original apparatus, which holds that the park’s purpose is to preserve nature and benefit from its carefully managed tourism, the idea of ecological equilibrium becomes the apparatus that confiscates resources. The activator of this apparatus is symbiosis, including alfalfa pellets, fencings, electric railroads, and other subsets of matter that travel between both realms of milieus. To achieve an authentic equilibrium of the ecosystem, it is to establish the opposite apparatus [similar to the idea of the profane to sacred] that relinquishes the traditional narrative of symbiotic relationship and benefits from the autonomy of human and ecosystem. If elk and wolves [consumers of the ecosystem] are the opposite apparatus, then the primary producers[wheatgrass] become the activators of the opposite apparatus - autonomy. Therefore, I would argue that the key is first to recognize symbiosis as the original apparatus. the regrowth of producers in the ecosystem is the essential part that unties the symbiotic relationship at the base level of both milieus. To untie the original apparatus is to relinquish the concept of tourist gaze based on difference and forge a new aesthetic appeal based on sameness[ordinary]. To reverse the process of mass desubjectification is to forge this new aesthetic appeal through media.


